networking: Live migration for ovn-k + hypershift + kubevirt (#1342)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/network/ovn-hypershift-live-migration.md

the one "owning" the subnet the address is comming from. This will happend
after VM live migration.

One scenario for live migration is to shut down the node the VMs were migrated
from, this means that the IPAM node subnet should go back to the pool but since
the migrated VMs contains IPs from it those IPs should reserved in case the 
subnet is assigned to a new node.

On that case before assining the subnet to the node the VMs ips need to be 
reserved so they don't get assigned to new pods

Another scenario is ovn-kubernetes pods restarting after live migration, on 
that case ovnkube-master should discover to what ip pool the VM belongs 
(using an anotation or searching for subnets) and reserve the address.

### Risks and Mitigations

### OVN extended arp_proxy features ####

The current ovn arp_porxy is missing the following features: enforcing the mac 
address and ipv6, ideally those get implemented and ovn-kubernetes have 
them for 4.14 release.

In case they don't arrive on time, it will not be able to configure IPv6 hosted
clusters at hypershift and VMs neighbours will need to be flushed after live

> migration 

Author: Changing it by "arp table"

- No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.
- Support exposing workers with services 
- Allow workers services acess to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.

To accomplish that the ovn-kubernetes default network handling has to implement some features triggered when a 
hypershift kubevirt VM is detected.

## Motivation

At kubevirt every VM is backed up by a "virt-launcher" pod; how the "virt-launcher" pod net interface is "bind" to the VM is specified by the network binding at the VM spec.

The main VM network binding mechanism are:
- masquerade binding: the VM has a stable fake address that is masqueraded (SNAT) at virt-launcher pod all the VMs have the same IP.
- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device, a DHCP server is started with the ip from the pod so DHCP aware VMs get it.

Since Masquerade binding has a fake address at VM guest it cannot be used for hypershift, the kubernetes nodes should see the address they are using to register to the api server.

> The bridge bindging is able to expose the pod ip to the VM as expected by hypershift but kubevirt does not support live migration with it, for kubevirt to support live migration with bridge binding 

Reviewer: bindging/binding

at primary interface the OVN kubernetes CNI need to do the following:
- not set the IP at pod netns
- not expect the IP to be on the pod netns

### Goals

Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kuberentes 
which is the default CNI for openshift.

### Non-Goals

- Support kubevirt live-migration out of hypershift context

## Proposal

The gist of the design is:

1. Hypershift kubevirt workers attach to ovn-k node switches but CNI does not set address at virt-launcher pods netns
2. DHCP is configured at VMs logical switch ports to deliver the address to VMs
3. Routing is done using /32 address so one node's subnet ip can be routed from different node

> 3. The VM's gateway ip and mac is independent of the node they are running on using proxy arp

Reviewer: is/are

 assigned to the VM with the DHCP options from the LSP, this allows to use 
 kubevirt bridge binding with pod networking and still do live migration.

#### IPAM

The /32 routing feature allows an address to be runnig at a node different from
the one "owning" the subnet the address is comming from. This will happend
after VM live migration.

One scenario for live migration is to shut down the node the VMs were migrated
from, this means that the IPAM node subnet should go back to the pool but since
the migrated VMs contains IPs from it those IPs should reserved in case the 
subnet is assigned to a new node.

On that case before assigning the subnet to the node the VMs ips need to be 
reserved so they don't get assigned to new pods

Another scenario is ovn-kubernetes pods restarting after live migration, on 
that case ovnkube-master should discover to what ip pool the VM belongs 
(using an annotation or searching for subnets) and reserve the address.

#### Detecting hypershift VMs and live migration

This enhancement only applies for hypershift kubevirt workers so the rest of 
virtual machine should not use it, to do a new label will be added to

> virt-launcher pod so ovn-k can detect if the /32 routing need to be done.

Reviewer: can we go ahead and give the label a name now so it's an agreed on part of the enhancement pr?

maybe something like `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-network-bridge-binding-live-migration`. that's long, but it comes in under the 63 character label key limit and is pretty descriptive to exactly what we're doing.

```
$ printf "kubevirt.io/allow-pod-network-bridge-binding-live-migration" | wc -m
59
```

has finish. Also to discard old virt-launcher pod the creation timestamp can
be used, ignoring them is they are not the latest one.

### Risks and Mitigations

### OVN extended arp_proxy features ####

The current ovn arp_proxy is missing the following features: enforcing the mac 
address and ipv6, ideally those get implemented and ovn-kubernetes have 
them for 4.14 release.

In case they don't arrive on time, it will not be able to configure IPv6 hosted
clusters at hypershift and VMs arp table will need to be refreshed after live
migration. 

### Open Questions 

Do this impact non hypershift payloads ? The control-plane will have some more
load from the /32 routing but data-plane is not affected

Do this work with future interconnect topology ? It's not using a distributed 
switch per hosted closter so that part should be fine, but it may needed 
to replicate /32 routing at all node's ovn_cluster_router.

Do this need extra configuration at openshift virtualization ? The bridge 
binding pod network live migration feature gate need to be activated

### Test Plan

Conformance for the hosted cluster has to be run before, during and after live

> migration.

Reviewer: I think we'll need to add a conformance test that explicitly exercises that connections are not dropped during live migration.

We actually have the ability to add this kind of test to our conformance test suite `openshift/origin`. With knowledge that we're running the `kubevirt` infrastructure, and with access to the underlying infra cluster's kubeconfig, we can force a live migration to occur while holding tcp connections open between two pods on separate kubevirt vm nodes.

see Oren's PR here [1] for more info. Once that PR is merged, all the pieces will exist for a live migration test. We'll have the kubeconfigs for infra and guest clusters, and be able to execute the live migration from the test driver

1. https://github.com/openshift/origin/pull/27456

- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

#### Removing a deprecated feature
n/a
### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Since hypershift is tech preview before this enhacement Upgrade/Downgrade is 
not supported for hosted clusters, but it should not break openshift 
networking for other payloads on upgrade or downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy
n/a

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

#### Failure Modes

Probable failure situations include
- OVN control plane too loaded by /32 routing
  - Too much CPU / Memory
  - Too slow a transaction rate
  - Disk is almost full

#### Support Procedures

The CNV network team will be responsible for debugging hypershift kubevirt live 
migration issues, alerts related to those routed should be helpful. 

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`.

## Drawbacks

Doing live migration over pod network with kubevirt and changing its topology may present some risks and need to be 

> thourouful tested and supported.

Reviewer: thourouful/thoroughly

---
title: OVN-kubernetes live migration for hypershift kubevirt provider
authors:
  - @ellorent
reviewers:
  - "@dcbw"
  - @danwinship
  - @tssurya
  - @numans
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2023-02-06
last-updated: 2023-02-06
tracking-link: 
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-22946"
see-also:
  - "https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/"
---

# OVN-kubernetes live migration for hypershift kubevirt provider

## Summary

> The [Hypershift](https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/) project creates openshift clusters on demand on top of already provisioned openshift by deploying "Hosted Control Planes" and attach worker nodes to "Hosted Control Planes" using oneof different providers, such as aws, azure, baremetal (agent), and kubevirt, in the case of kubevirt it will spins up the workers as kubevirt virtual machines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Hypershift](https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/) project creates openshift clusters on demand on top of already provisioned openshift by deploying  (and attaching working nodes to) "Hosted Control Planes" using one of different providers, such as aws, azure, baremetal (agent), and kubevirt.

In KubeVirt's case, the worker nodes will be spun as KubeVirt virtual machines.
```

There are some network requirements, some of them are imposed by kubevirt 
live migration and others by kubernetes:

> - Consistent IP follows VM during Live Migration, and is the IP of the primary guest node interface that the kubelet uses to register/communicate with.

Reviewer 2: While I understand the sentence, I think it may be a bit convoluted.

How about we focus on the kubelet IP ? Something like:
> The IP Kubelet is listening to follows the node during live migration

Just a suggestion; while it is simpler, I'm unsure it reads much better.

- Guest Cluster Network isolation. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to other guest clusters directly except through public LBs. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to any infra components except through public LBs
- No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.

> - Support exposing workers with services 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support exposing workers via services 
```

> - Allow workers services acess to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allow workers services access to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.
```

I'm confused; what do you mean by worker's services ? Maybe throw in a couple examples, to make it more explicit.

hypershift kubevirt VM is detected.

## Motivation

At kubevirt every VM is backed up by a "virt-launcher" pod; how the "virt-launcher" pod net interface is "bind" to the VM is specified by the network binding at the VM spec.

The main VM network binding mechanism are:
- masquerade binding: the VM has a stable fake address that is masqueraded (SNAT) at virt-launcher pod all the VMs have the same IP.
- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device, a DHCP server is started with the ip from the pod so DHCP aware VMs get it.

Since Masquerade binding has a fake address at VM guest it cannot be used for hypershift, the kubernetes nodes should see the address they are using to register to the api server.

The bridge binding is able to expose the pod ip to the VM as expected by hypershift but kubevirt does not support live migration with it, for kubevirt to support live migration with bridge binding 
at primary interface the OVN kubernetes CNI need to do the following:
- not set the IP at pod netns

> - not expect the IP to be on the pod netns

Reviewer 2: I feel you're explaining the "how" to achieve the goals. 

I don't think this fits the motivation section.

Author: Moving this to proposal.

### Goals

Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kuberentes 
which is the default CNI for openshift.

### Non-Goals

> - Support kubevirt live-migration out of hypershift context

Reviewer 2: I'm aware this is a non-goal, but, what's the difference here ? 

I thought the problem was the same. Could you elaborate on why we're excluding regular kubevirt VMs ?

## Proposal

The gist of the design is:

1. Hypershift kubevirt workers attach to ovn-k node switches but CNI does not set address at virt-launcher pods netns
2. DHCP is configured at VMs logical switch ports to deliver the address to VMs

> 3. Routing is done using /32 address so one node's subnet ip can be routed from different node

Reviewer 2: would it make sense to focus on the subject - i.e. the node ? 

Something like `Nodes are interconnected using IP addresses on a /32 subnet`. 

And another question: I assume we really don't care about IPv6 in this. 

Would it make sense to add that as a non-goal ?

Author: The subjet is about routing not node and how to "move" IPs between the nodes.

We have to support IPv6 when we talk about /32 we talk about the counterpart for IPv6 too

Reviewer 2: I would then ensure IPv6 is mentioned in the docs. Including the goal section. 

IMO, since you want to use the same addressing scheme as in ipv4 (one address per subnet), you can't refer to this as /32 routing. That's both misleading and wrong for IPv6.

Author: Changed to "point to point routing"

3. The VM's gateway ip and mac are independent of the node they are running on using proxy arp

> 4. The [proxy arp](https://github.com/dceara/ovn/tree/bz2155306-arp-proxy-poc) functionality need to be implemented at ovn 

Reviewer 2: would it make sense to elaborate a bit on this solution ? Maybe an annex at the end of the doc.

Author: In fact this story has changed, we discover that we have already a basic proxy arp feature at ovn but we need to add some features.

Will reprhase it.

### User Stories

I, a Hypershift user, need to migrate one hosted cluster without affecting different ones and have minimal
disruption.

### API Extensions

n/a

## Design Details

### OVN-Kubernetes 

> Following is the work needed at ovnkube-master to implement the needed features

Reviewer 2: I would remove this sentence; it doesn't add much.

#### Topology

**Routing with /32:**

Do /32 routing with a policy for outbound traffic and a static route for
inbound, with this the VM can live migrate to different node and keep previous 

> address keeping n/s and e/s communication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
address keeping n/s and e/w communication.
```

│ static route              │───│ policy                     │
│ prefix: 10.244.0.8        │   │ match: ip4.src==10.244.0.8 │
│ nexthop: 10.244.0.8       │   │ action: reroute            │
│ output-port: rtos-node1   │   │ nexthop: 10.64.0.2         │
│ policy: dst-ip            │   │                            │  
└───────────────────────────┘   └────────────────────────────┘ 
```
**Nodes logical switch ports:**

The "router" logical switch port per node need to activate "arp_proxy" option
with the VMs gateway and a fixed mac so VM neighbor cache is consistent 
after live migration

```text
    ┌────────────────────┐     ┌────────────────────┐
    │logical switch node1│     │logical switch node2│
 ┌────────────────────┐  │     │   ┌─────────────────────┐      
 │ lsp stor-node1     │──┘     └───│ lsp stor-node2      │      
 │ options:           │            │ options:            │    
 │  arp_proxy:        │            │   arp_proxy:        │
 │   0a:58:0a:f3:00:00│            │    0a:58:0a:f3:00:00│
 │   169.254.1.1      │            │    169.254.1.1      │
 └────────────────────┘            └─────────────────────┘
```

**VMs logical switch ports:**

> The logical switch port for new VMs will use ovn-k ipam to reserve an address
> and when live migrate the new lsp created on target will re-use the source 
> lsp address, since the virt-launcher pod netns address will not be set by 
> cni this is fine.

Reviewer 2: A bit convoluted; how about 

```suggestion
The logical switch port for new VMs will use ovn-k ipam to reserve an IP address,
and when live-migrating the VM, the LSP address will be re-used.

CNI must avoid setting the IP address on the migration destination pod.
```

the migrated VMs contains IPs from it those IPs should reserved in case the 
subnet is assigned to a new node.

On that case before assigning the subnet to the node the VMs ips need to be 
reserved so they don't get assigned to new pods

Another scenario is ovn-kubernetes pods restarting after live migration, on 
that case ovnkube-master should discover to what ip pool the VM belongs 
(using an annotation or searching for subnets) and reserve the address.

#### Detecting hypershift VMs and live migration

This enhancement only applies for hypershift kubevirt workers so the rest of 
virtual machine should not use it, those VMs will be marked with label 
`kubevirt.io/allow-pod-network-bridge-binding-live-migration` by hypershift
kubevirt provider and ovn-k will do /32 routing if detected, the of non
hypershift VM should not add that special label.

There is also a moment where routing need to do the "switch", meaning that the
vm has to be routed over the host is running on, to detect that the label
"kubevirt.io/nodeName" can be check since it appears just after live migration
has finish. Also to discard old virt-launcher pod the creation timestamp can

> be used, ignoring them is they are not the latest one.

Author: This one describe when we change the point to point routing

### Risks and Mitigations

### OVN extended arp_proxy features ####

The current ovn arp_proxy is missing the following features: enforcing the mac 
address and ipv6, ideally those get implemented and ovn-kubernetes have 
them for 4.14 release.

In case they don't arrive on time, it will not be able to configure IPv6 hosted
clusters at hypershift and VMs arp table will need to be refreshed after live
migration. 

> ### Open Questions 

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's just me, but I don't follow these open questions: all of them have perfectly valid answers on them. 

I could have misinterpreted the goal of this section though - do not act upon my comment yet please.

Author: ditto

Do this impact non hypershift payloads ? The control-plane will have some more
load from the /32 routing but data-plane is not affected

Do this work with future interconnect topology ? It's not using a distributed 
switch per hosted cluster so that part should be fine, but it may needed 
to replicate /32 routing at all node's ovn_cluster_router.

Do this need extra configuration at openshift virtualization ? The bridge 

> binding pod network live migration feature gate need to be activated

Reviewer 2: is this an open question ? You have a perfect answer for it IMO :)

Author: I have follow how it's done at this enhancement and looks like they have also an answer 
https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/network/ovn-on-hypershift.md#open-questions

Reviewer 2: Hm, on the link you've pasted **some** of them do ... others don't have an answer at all. Some other defer the answer to follow-ups. One even says performance must be taken into account.

I'm OK if you want to leave it as is, but I feel if you know the answer to question, they are not "open questions", and that info belongs elsewhere in the docs - probably structured in a different way. 

Not a must, you call.

Author: I will kept them so we don't forget.

### Test Plan

Add some network tests to (hypershift conformance)[https://github.com/openshift/origin/pull/27456]
that will do live migration with the following scenarios:
- TCP connection between VMs
- TCP connection to VMs from service
- TCP connection from VM to service

> The connection has to survive and downtown be minimal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The connection has to survive and downtime be minimal.
```

- Write symptoms-based alerts for the component(s)

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

#### Removing a deprecated feature
n/a
### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Since hypershift is tech preview before this enhancement Upgrade/Downgrade is 
not supported for hosted clusters, but it should not break openshift 
networking for other payloads on upgrade or downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy
n/a

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

#### Failure Modes

Probable failure situations include
- OVN control plane too loaded by /32 routing
  - Too much CPU / Memory
  - Too slow a transaction rate
  - Disk is almost full

#### Support Procedures

The CNV network team will be responsible for debugging hypershift kubevirt live 
migration issues, alerts related to those routed should be helpful. 

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation

> History`.

Reviewer 2: could you link the section instead ?

Author: Well, this is a leftover from the template, I will add the content.

- Guest Cluster Network isolation. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to other guest clusters directly except through public LBs. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to any infra components except through public LBs.
- No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.
- Support exposing workers via services. 
- Allow workers services access to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.

To accomplish the goals listed above the ovn-kubernetes default network has to implement some features triggered for an Hypershift KubeVirt VM.
hypershift kubevirt VM is detected.

## Motivation

To reach GA at hypershift kubevirt provider it has to implement live migration and adding live-migration features to ovn-k default pod network
is possible without much impact. This will allow users to spin hypershift kubevirt hosted clusters out of the box without setting up 
the network at a secondary interface.

### Goals

Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kuberentes 
which is the default CNI for openshift.

### Non-Goals

> - Support kubevirt live-migration out of hypershift context

Reviewer 2: KubeVirt itself also requires this feature. 

Why is this a non-goal ? It makes it look like KubeVirt VMs do not require this. They do.

Author: Removed

## Proposal

> At kubevirt every VM is backed up by a "virt-launcher" pod; how the "virt-launcher" pod net interface is "bind" to the VM is specified by the network binding at the VM spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At kubevirt every VM is executed inside a "virt-launcher" pod; how the "virt-launcher" pod net interface is "bound" to the VM is specified by the network binding at the VM spec.
```

The main VM network binding mechanism are:

> - masquerade binding: the VM has a stable fake address that is masqueraded (SNAT) at virt-launcher pod all the VMs have the same IP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- masquerade binding: the VM has a stable fake address that is masqueraded (SNAT) at virt-launcher pod. 
```

You can define the subnet via the API - thus, this is not exactly true.

> - bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device, a DHCP server is started with the ip from the pod so DHCP aware VMs get it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device. When IPAM is configured on the pod interface, a DHCP server is started to advertise the pod's IP to DHCP aware VMs.
```

  - "@dcbw"
  - "@danwinship"
  - "@tssurya"
  - "@numans"
approvers:
  - "@martinkennelly"
api-approvers:
  - "@martinkennelly"
creation-date: 2023-02-06
last-updated: 2023-02-06
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-22946"
see-also:
  - "https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/"
---

# OVN-kubernetes live migration for hypershift kubevirt provider

## Summary

The [Hypershift](https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/) project creates openshift clusters on demand on top of already provisioned openshift by deploying  (and attaching working nodes to) "Hosted Control Planes" using one of different providers, such as aws, azure, baremetal (agent), and kubevirt.

In KubeVirt's case, the worker nodes will be spun as KubeVirt virtual machines.

There are some network requirements, some of them are imposed by kubevirt 
live migration and others by kubernetes:

- The IP Kubelet uses to register/communicate should follow the node during live migration.
- Guest Cluster Network isolation. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to other guest clusters directly except through public LBs. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to any infra components except through public LBs.

> - No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.

Reviewer 3: Ill checkout your tests :)

> - No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.

Author: The TCP conntection is not broken (this is the main part) and there is a period of time with tcp packets drops:
- for pre-copy live migration ~1sec
- for post-copy live migration ~8sec

That's good enough for hypershift now.

> - Support exposing workers via services. 

Reviewer 4: what does this mean exactly?

Author: Clarified

- Allow workers services access to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.

To accomplish the goals listed above the ovn-kubernetes default network has to implement some features triggered for an Hypershift KubeVirt VM.

> hypershift kubevirt VM is detected.

Reviewer 4: is this line supposed to be its own sentence?

Author: Removing, it's a left over.

## Motivation

> To reach GA at hypershift kubevirt provider it has to implement live migration and adding live-migration features to ovn-k default pod network

Reviewer 4: Hypershift and kubevirt integration requires the ability to have live-migration functionality across the network with OVN-Kubernetes.

is possible without much impact. This will allow users to spin hypershift kubevirt hosted clusters out of the box without setting up 
the network at a secondary interface.

### User Stories

I, a Hypershift user, need to migrate one hosted cluster without affecting different ones and have minimal
disruption.

### Goals

Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kuberentes 
which is the default CNI for openshift, this should work with dual stack.

### Non-Goals

n/a

## Proposal

At kubevirt every VM is executed inside a "virt-launcher" pod; how the "virt-launcher" pod net interface is "bound" to the VM is specified by the network binding at the VM spec.

> The main VM network binding mechanism are:

Reviewer 4: mechanisms

- masquerade binding: the VM has a stable fake address that is masqueraded (SNAT) at virt-launcher pod. 
- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device. When IPAM is configured on the pod interface, a DHCP server is started to advertise the pod's IP to DHCP aware VMs.

Since Masquerade binding has a fake address at VM guest it cannot be used for hypershift, the kubernetes nodes should see the address they are using to register to the api server.

The bridge binding is able to expose the pod ip to the VM as expected by hypershift but kubevirt does not support live migration with it, for kubevirt to support live migration with bridge binding 
at primary interface the OVN kubernetes CNI need to do the following:

> - not set the IP at pod netns

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should make it clear here that OVN-Kube is still assigning the IP to the pod, it is just not setting it in the netns? Also should you mention the proposal includes adding the capability to migrate this IP within OVN from one node to another when live migration happens?

Author: Added `controller` to the paragraph and the point you mention.

- not expect the IP to be on the pod netns

### Workflow Description

The gist of the design is:

1. Hypershift kubevirt workers attach to ovn-k node switches but CNI does not set IP addresses in virt-launcher pods netns

> 2. DHCP is configured at VMs logical switch ports to deliver the address to VMs

Reviewer 4: maybe clarify the DHCP server is not OVN or OVN-kubernetes and it is...what? kubevirt or something.

Reviewer 3: I thought it was set in OVN via dhcp options [1]. Please confirm @qinqon 
[1] https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/ovn-nb.5.html#DHCP_Options_TABLE

Author: > maybe clarify the DHCP server is not OVN or OVN-kubernetes and it is...what? kubevirt or something.

@trozet the enhancement use the OVN virtual DHCP server adding DHCP options to the LSP, the kubevirt bridge binding DHCP is not used since we are not setting an address to the virt-launcher pod's veth, I will clarify this at the bullet.

3. A point to point routing is used so one node's subnet ip can be routed from different node

> 3. The VM's gateway ip and mac are independent of the node they are running on using proxy arp

Reviewer 4: lets use consistent capitalization of MAC, IP, ARP

> 4. Current OVN arp proxy feature is missing following features: configure MAC and IPv6, they are being implemented [here](https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn/pull/176)

Author: I will update the doc

### API Extensions

n/a

## Design Details

### OVN-Kubernetes 

#### Topology

**Point to point routing:**

> Do point to point routing with a policy for outbound traffic and a static route for

Reviewer 4: so the policy is in place so that egress traffic can leave on the original node where the pod was assigned? Why is this necessary? To not disrupt egress/egress reply traffic?

Author: Added the following to the explanation 

```
also outbound traffic will will go    
over the node where VM is running on to reduce inter node communication.
```

inbound, with this the VM can live migrate to different node and keep previous 
address keeping n/s and e/w communication.

```text
       ┌───────────────────────────┐
       │     ovn_cluster_router    │
┌───────────────────────────┐   ┌────────────────────────────┐
│ static route              │───│ policy                     │
│ prefix: 10.244.0.8        │   │ match: ip4.src==10.244.0.8 │
│ nexthop: 10.244.0.8       │   │ action: reroute            │
│ output-port: rtos-node1   │   │ nexthop: 10.64.0.2         │
│ policy: dst-ip            │   │                            │  
└───────────────────────────┘   └────────────────────────────┘ 
```
**Nodes logical switch ports:**

The "router" logical switch port per node need to activate "arp_proxy" option

> with the VMs gateway and a fixed mac so VM neighbor cache is consistent 

Reviewer 4: this is confusing to me. What are IP are we proxying arp for? You mention VMs gateway. Wouldn't it be the pod IP now that it has moved from node A to node B, and things in node A might try to ARP for the address?

after live migration

```text
┌────────────────────┐     ┌────────────────────┐
│logical switch node1│     │logical switch node2│
┌────────────────────┐  │     │   ┌─────────────────────┐      
│ lsp stor-node1     │──┘     └───│ lsp stor-node2      │      
│ options:           │            │ options:            │    
│  arp_proxy:        │            │   arp_proxy:        │
│   0a:58:0a:f3:00:00│            │    0a:58:0a:f3:00:00│
│   169.254.1.1      │            │    169.254.1.1      │
└────────────────────┘            └─────────────────────┘
```

**VMs logical switch ports:**

The logical switch port for new VMs will use ovn-k ipam to reserve an IP address,
and when live-migrating the VM, the LSP address will be re-used.

> CNI must avoid setting the IP address on the migration destination pod.

Reviewer 4: But OVNK itself should still keep this IP allocated to the new pod, even though CNI wont configure it..right? Would be good to explicitly say that here.

> 

Reviewer 3: With label `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-network-bridge-binding-live-migration` ?

> 

Reviewer 2: We have an IPAM related epic for Openshift Virt that will also require this, but has **nothing** to do with the pod network.

If we do this based on a label / annotation, I would please ask you to use another label, whose name is more aligned to this. `kubevirt.io/skip-ip-configuration-on-cni` or something.

> 

Reviewer 3: ..and if we are going this route, should this not be defined within kubevirt libs that we can import this label? 
Dont want to define it in OVN-K if at all possible. I assume its not defined there if we are discussing this here. @qinqon WDYT?

> 

Author: > how will ovn-k know this pod is a kubevirt pod and not set IP in pods primary interface?

@martinkennelly , There is a chapter specific for that `Detecting hypershift VMs and live migration`, this is what ovn-k should do.

> We have an IPAM related epic for Openshift Virt that will also require this, but has **nothing** to do with the pod network.
> 
> If we do this based on a label / annotation, I would please ask you to use another label, whose name is more aligned to this. `kubevirt.io/skip-ip-configuration-on-cni` or something.

@maiqueb this annotation is not only used by ovn-k to activate DHCP options and disable CNI ip address configuration, it is also understood by [kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/e7016777cc6e8207d8dbc0cc9dcb47d83a79e83c/staging/src/kubevirt.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L938) to allow live migration with bridge binding, so calling this `skip-ip-configuration-on-cni` does not cover all what it does

> 

Author: > ..and if we are going this route, should this not be defined within kubevirt libs that we can import this annotation? Dont want to define it in OVN-K if at all possible. I assume its not defined there if we are discussing this here. @qinqon WDYT?

@martinkennelly that is already defined there but I don't know if ovn-k maintainers will allow to import go dependency [`kubevirt.io/api`](https://github.com/kubevirt/api/blob/main/go.mod)

> 

Reviewer 3: why wouldnt we? I think its fine.

> 

Author: Is the stuff under `kubevirt.io/api/go.mod` good for you ?  if this is the case is always better to import it.

> 

Author: > That's what I'm advocating for: using two separate annotations, each with a different meaning.

@maiqueb I am fine with that, @martinkennelly @trozet are you ok have a pair of annotations instead of just one ? one for allow live migration with bridge binding at kubevirt and the other to skip setting ip configuration at CNI.

> 

Author: @maiqueb maybe the annotation has to be `ovn.org/skip-ip-configuration-on-cni` instead of using the `kubevirt.io` prefix ?

> 

Reviewer 2: oh yes, I think that's better. Good catch.

> 

Reviewer 3: > Is the stuff under kubevirt.io/api/go.mod good for you ? if this is the case is always better to import it.

Implementation detail but looks fine :) No deps when importing it.

> I am fine with that, @martinkennelly @trozet are you ok have a pair of annotations instead of just one ? one for allow live migration with bridge binding at kubevirt and the other to skip setting ip configuration at CNI.

I am fine with it especially after Miguels context.

> 

Reviewer 3: > maybe the annotation has to be ovn.org/skip-ip-configuration-on-cni instead of using the kubevirt.io prefix ?

I was just about to say this! +++

Also the DHCP options will be configured to deliver the address to the VMs

```text
┌──────────────────────┐     ┌────────────────────┐
│logical switch node1  │     │logical switch node2│
┌──────────────────────┐  │     │   ┌──────────────────────┐      

> │ lsp ns-virt-launcher1│──┘     └───│ lsp ns-virt-launcher2│     

Reviewer 2: there's something weird here. Where is the `ns-virt-launcher1` supposed to attach to ?

Author: Have fix the pictures, it's attached to logical switch "node1"

│  10.244.0.8          │            │  10.244.0.8          │
└──────────────────────┘            └──────────────────────┘

┌─────────────────────────────────┐
│ dhcp-options 1234               │
│   lease_time: 3500              │
│   router: 169.254.1.1           │
│   dns_server: [kubedns]         │
│   server_id: 169.254.1.1        │
│   server_mac: c0:ff:ee:00:00:01 │
└─────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Virt-launcher pod address:**
The CNI will not set an address at virt-launcher pod netns, that address is
assigned to the VM with the DHCP options from the LSP, this allows to use 
kubevirt bridge binding with pod networking and still do live migration.

#### IPAM

The point to point routing feature allows an address to be running at a node different from
the one "owning" the subnet the address is coming from. This will happen
after VM live migration.

One scenario for live migration is to shut down the node the VMs were migrated
from, this means that the IPAM node subnet should go back to the pool but since
the migrated VMs contains IPs from it those IPs should reserved in case the 
subnet is assigned to a new node.

> On that case before assigning the subnet to the node the VMs ips need to be 

Reviewer 4: good point

reserved so they don't get assigned to new pods

Another scenario is ovn-kubernetes pods restarting after live migration, on 
that case ovnkube-master should discover to what ip pool the VM belongs 
(using an annotation or searching for subnets) and reserve the address.

#### Detecting hypershift VMs and live migration

This enhancement only applies for hypershift kubevirt workers so the rest of 
virtual machine should not use it, those VMs will be labeled with

> `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-network-bridge-binding-live-migration` by hypershift

Reviewer 4: we need some more steps here on how this will exactly work with OVNK. Who labels the pod, is it the pre-migrated pod? Is a new pod spawned in its place during live migration? Do they have the same name, but different UID?

Author: Clarified and added some bullets for those labels and annotations.

hypershift VM should not add that special label.

The VM's host node change after live migration and the traffic has to be 
redirected over this host node. To do so the point to point routing has to be
changed and to detect post live-migration event a pair of 
kubevirt virt-launcher pod labels has to be inspected, `kubevirt.io/nodeName` 
and `creationTimestamp`, the first one is set after live migration with the 
name of the new host node and the second one allow ovn-k to disregard old
virt-launcher pod (they are not deleted after live-migration).

### Risks and Mitigations

#### OVN extended arp_proxy features

The current ovn arp_proxy is missing the following features: enforcing the mac 
address and ipv6, ideally those get implemented and ovn-kubernetes have 
them for 4.14 release.

In case they don't arrive on time, it will not be able to configure IPv6 hosted
clusters at hypershift and VMs arp table will need to be refreshed after live
migration. 

### Drawbacks

Doing live migration over pod network with kubevirt and changing its topology may present some risks and need to be 
thoroughly tested and supported.

### Open Questions 

> Do this impact non hypershift payloads ? The control-plane will have some more

Reviewer 4: Does this impact

load from the point to point routing but data-plane is not affected

Do this work with future interconnect topology ? It's not using a distributed 
switch per hosted cluster so that part should be fine, but it may needed 
to replicate point to point routing at all node's ovn_cluster_router.

> 

Reviewer 4: Additional question. What kind of scale do you expect here? If we had 1000s of these migrated pods we could have 1000s of new policies and routes. With IC that would be 1000s*nodes.

Author: The scale is on thousands to reduce control plane preasure (with IC there will be one ovn control plane per node) an addres set per node can be used, it will group all the IPs belonging to kubevirt VM's for a specific node so we will have one policy/route per node.

This will drastically reduce the number of logical flows but the number of ovs flows will be the same, after talking with some OVN maintainers looks like for the ovs part is not that bad.

Is the address set worth it ? Do we need to do it at this enhancement or can it be done at follow up ?

Reviewer 4: >Also anoter optimization is that the point to point routing is only needed if the VM's is running at a node that do not "own" the VM's IP, meaning that if there is no live-migration we don't need point to point routing for the VM, this make sense ?

I dont think we should have static routes for pods that are not live migrated. The regular routes should continue to function like they do today.

Author: I will state that at the doc, generally speaking point to point routing has to be specified if the pod IP dos not belongs to the node's subnet, since it can happend that we do a second live migration and the VM goes back to the original node so in that case the policies and static routes are not needed.

Reviewer: > I dont think we should have static routes for pods that are not live migrated. The regular routes should continue to function like they do today.

@trozet @maiqueb I want to caution against this as I think the complexity of having two modes (normal routing when on original node vs /32 after migration) might outweigh the value of this optimization. I'm not entirely sure this optimization will do anything in our use case either.

Here's the reason. While it's true that when guest clusters hosted on KubeVirt VMs are initially created, the VMs will all be on the original node they started on, possibly for quite some time. The issue here is that the moment someone updates the underlying infra cluster, this will nearly 100% change. Every single VM within the cluster will Live Migrate as the infra cluster nodes are rebooted during the update. At that point all the pods will shuffle around, and this optimization is nearly completely void.

Reviewer 2: while that's true, I think all we're saying is the reconcile cycles should dispose of that route + policy when they're not needed.

@davidvossel

### Test Plan

Add some network tests to [hypershift conformance](https://github.com/openshift/origin/pull/27456)
that will do live migration with the following scenarios:
- TCP connection between VMs
- TCP connection to VMs from service
- TCP connection from VM to service

The connection has to survive and downtime should be minimal.

> ### Graduation Criteria

Reviewer 3: Kubevirt provider is going GA for 4.14 but live migration will be dev preview for 4.14? Am I understanding this correctly.

Author: I have modify `Graduation Criteria` to clarify that

Reviewer 3: I dont see it now.

At hypershift kubevirt provider GA this feature will be graduated since it unblocks the 
live migration feature

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers
- Enumerate service level indicators (SLIs), expose SLIs as metrics
- Write symptoms-based alerts for the component(s)

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

#### Removing a deprecated feature
n/a
### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Since hypershift is tech preview before this enhancement Upgrade/Downgrade is 
not supported for hosted clusters, but it should not break openshift 
networking for other payloads on upgrade or downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy
n/a

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

#### Failure Modes

> Probable failure situations include

Reviewer 4: another probable failure situation is leaked ip allocations due to bugs with this new feature, stale policies and routes left on ovn_cluser_router

There are some network requirements, some of them are imposed by kubevirt 
live migration and others by kubernetes:

- The IP Kubelet uses to register/communicate should follow the node during live migration.
- Guest Cluster Network isolation. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to other guest clusters directly except through public LBs. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to any infra components except through public LBs.
- No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.
- Expose hosted cluster pods running at workers (VMs) using NodePort/LoadBalancer services at infra cluster.
- Allow workers services access to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.

To accomplish the goals listed above the ovn-kubernetes default network has to implement some features triggered for an Hypershift KubeVirt VM.

## Motivation

Hypershift and kubevirt integration requires the ability to have live-migration functionality across the network with OVN-Kubernetes.

### User Stories

I, a Hypershift user, need to migrate one hosted cluster without affecting different ones and have minimal

> disruption.

Reviewer 2: Right, but I'm trying to say I don't think many people reading this will understand what the deal is. 

Feel free to keep it if you think this is straight-forward, and can only be interpreted in a single way.

### Goals

Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kuberentes 
which is the default CNI for openshift, this should work with dual stack.

### Non-Goals

This feature is not implemented at secondary networks, only primary networks will be live migratable.

## Proposal

At kubevirt every VM is executed inside a "virt-launcher" pod; how the "virt-launcher" pod net interface is "bound" to the VM is specified by the network binding at the VM spec.

The main VM network binding mechanisms are:
- masquerade binding: the VM has a stable fake address that is masqueraded (SNAT) at virt-launcher pod. 
- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device. When IPAM is configured on the pod interface, a DHCP server is started to advertise the pod's IP to DHCP aware VMs.

> Since Masquerade binding has a fake address at VM guest it cannot be used for hypershift, the kubernetes nodes should see the address they are using to register to the api server.

Author: The bridge binding annotation only works for bridge binding VMs with masquerade are live migratable (but they don't cover hypershift requirements).

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
n/a

#### Tech Preview -> GA

Current hypershift kubevirt provider tech preview is 4.13, this enhancement
will allow hypershift kubevirt provider one of the GA requirements
(live migration) for 4.14.

#### Removing a deprecated feature
n/a

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Since hypershift is tech preview before this enhancement Upgrade/Downgrade is 
not supported for hosted clusters, but it should not break openshift 
networking for other payloads on upgrade or downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy
n/a

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

#### Failure Modes

Probable failure situations include
- OVN control plane too loaded by point to point routing
  - Too much CPU / Memory
  - Too slow a transaction rate
  - Disk is almost full

- From bug at the feature ovn-k can suffer the following failures:
    - Dangling IP allocations can empty node's IP pool if a bug is present at the feature.
    - Dangling policies and static routes at ovn_cluster_router after live migration or VM's deletion.

#### Support Procedures

The CNV network team will be responsible for debugging hypershift kubevirt live 

> migration issues, alerts related to those routed should be helpful. 

Author: Will specify that they are events.

the one "owning" the subnet the address is coming from. This will happen
after VM live migration.

One scenario for live migration is to shut down the node the VMs were migrated
from, this means that the IPAM node subnet should go back to the pool but since
the migrated VMs contains IPs from it those IPs should reserved in case the 
subnet is assigned to a new node.

On that case before assigning the subnet to the node the VMs ips need to be 
reserved so they don't get assigned to new pods

Another scenario is ovn-kubernetes pods restarting after live migration, on 
that case ovnkube-master should discover to what IP pool the VM belongs 
(using an annotation or searching for subnets) and reserve the address.

#### Detecting hypershift VMs and live migration

This enhancement is implemented as part of ovn-k pod's CNI and controllers so
the feature detection mechanism have to be implemented as part of kubevirt
virt-launcher pods.

To skip CNI IP configuration and assign assign DHCP options to LSP the following
label and annotation are check to ensure that only kubevirt pods with explicit configuration
are affected:
- `ovn.org/skip-ip-configuration-on-cni`

> - `kubevirt.io/vm`

Reviewer 2: I think there's no real need for checking this annotation - other than limiting the feature to kubevirt VMs.

This could be used to implement "sticky" IPs on stateful sets for instance. 

But I am not opposing; we could start by limiting the feature to kubevirt VMs, and make it more general in the future.

Author: That's the idea, let's limiting it at the beggining and remove de limitation at follow up with proper testing.

As part of this enhancement ovn-k should configure a point to point routing after 
live migration to redirect it to the correct node and port, this feature is only
activated if the pod is annotated with `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-bridge-network-live-migration`.

During live migration there is source and target virt-launcher pod's with different names, the ovn-k pod's controller watch the following
annotation and label at target pod `kubevirt.io/nodeName` and `kubevirt.io/migration-target-start-timestamp`:
- The `kubevirt.io/nodeName` is set after the VM finishes live migrating or when it becomes ready.

> - The `kubevirt.io/migration-target-start-timestamp` is set when live migration has not finished but migration-target pod is ready to receive traffic (this happens at post-copy live migration, where migration is taking too long).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand well enough what is happening here.

IIUC, point-to-point routing will **only** be configured for pods with the `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-bridge-network-live-migration` annotation, and only when the controller spots the `kubevirt.io/nodeName` annotation to be the "target" node, or when the `kubevirt.io/migration-target-start-timestamp` annotation is set ?

Author: Yep the `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-bridge-network-live-migration` is for the point to point routing al together and the nodeName and migration-target-start-timestamp is to create/update point to point routing (it signals when the live migrated target is ready)

Reviewer 2: OK I see, thanks for clarifying. 

When do we "remove" the static route + policy ? I.e. what's the reconciliation criteria ?

Author: > OK I see, thanks for clarifying.
> 
> When do we "remove" the static route + policy ? I.e. what's the reconciliation criteria ?

Two cases:
- VM is removed
- VM is live migrated back to the node that owns its IP.

Reviewer 2: OK. Please add this info to the doc then.

Author: done

Reviewer 3: Do we also remove it when the pod is simply killed and moved to another host ? I.e rescheduled?

Author: > Do we also remove it when the pod is simply killed and moved to another host ? I.e rescheduled? Edit I guess that's covered under vm removed.

@martinkennelly, yes, whenever the VM is moved it check if ptp routing need to be created/deleted/modified and also the cleanup process always remove it.

- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device. When IPAM is configured on the pod interface, a DHCP server is started to advertise the pod's IP to DHCP aware VMs.

Since Masquerade binding has a fake address at VM guest it cannot be used for hypershift, the kubernetes nodes should see the address they are using to register to the api server.

The bridge binding is able to expose the pod IP to the VM as expected by hypershift but kubevirt does not support live migration with it, for kubevirt to support live migration with bridge binding 
at primary interface the OVN kubernetes CNI and controllers need to do the following:
- Do IP assignemnt with ovn-k but skip the CNI part that configure it at pod's netns veth.
- Do not expect the IP to be on the pod netns.
- Add the ability at ovn-k controllers to migrate pod's IP from node to node.

### Workflow Description

The gist of the design is:

1. Hypershift kubevirt workers attach to ovn-k node switches but CNI does not set IP addresses in virt-launcher pods netns

> 2. Deliver IP address at VMs configuring logical switch port DHCP options, the kubevir DHCP server is deactivated.

Reviewer 4: nit: kubevirt

assigned to the VM with the DHCP options from the LSP, this allows to use 
kubevirt bridge binding with pod networking and still do live migration.

#### IPAM

The point to point routing feature allows an address to be running at a node different from
the one "owning" the subnet the address is coming from. This will happen
after VM live migration.

One scenario for live migration is to shut down the node the VMs were migrated
from, this means that the IPAM node subnet should go back to the pool but since
the migrated VMs contains IPs from it those IPs should reserved in case the 
subnet is assigned to a new node.

On that case before assigning the subnet to the node the VMs ips need to be 
reserved so they don't get assigned to new pods

Another scenario is ovn-kubernetes pods restarting after live migration, on 
that case ovnkube-master should discover to what IP pool the VM belongs 
(using an annotation or searching for subnets) and reserve the address.

#### Detecting hypershift VMs and live migration

This enhancement is implemented as part of ovn-k pod's CNI and controllers so
the feature detection mechanism have to be implemented as part of kubevirt
virt-launcher pods.

> To skip CNI IP configuration and assign assign DHCP options to LSP the following

Reviewer 4: "assign" printed twice here

label and annotation are check to ensure that only kubevirt pods with explicit configuration
are affected:
- `ovn.org/skip-ip-configuration-on-cni`
- `kubevirt.io/vm`

As part of this enhancement ovn-k should configure a point to point routing after 
live migration to redirect it to the correct node and port, this feature is only
activated if the pod is annotated with `kubevirt.io/allow-pod-bridge-network-live-migration`.

> During live migration there is source and target virt-launcher pod's with different names, the ovn-k pod's controller watch the following

Reviewer 4: wait so if the source and target pods have different names, how does OVNK know source pod the target is migrating from?

Author: We check `CreationTimestamp` the feature only care about newest virt-launcher, the old ones is considered leftover and ignored it, I will add that to the enhancement.

https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/pull/3478/files#diff-eb30366251cb823a9618bac3c224e92aa52cbedf5fa9c0f5a2a4360902540a42R59

Reviewer 4: I think what I am missing is how ovnk knows the linkage between old and new, since they have different names. A timetamp only tells you what is old and what is new, but not which 2 pods are related. @maiqueb suggested:

"I think it'll see two pods (launcher-vmA-<xyz> and launcher-vmA-<zyx>) having [kubevirt.io/vm](http://kubevirt.io/vm) = vmA (same value). Thus it will know it's a migration."

That makes sense if we are using the value of that label to identify the old/new. Can you update the documents to explain that? Maybe show an example?

Reviewer 2: The example would be helpful indeed.

Author: > I think what I am missing is how ovnk knows the linkage between old and new, since they have different names. A timetamp only tells you what is old and what is new, but not which 2 pods are related. @maiqueb suggested:
> 
> 
> 
> "I think it'll see two pods (launcher-vmA-<xyz> and launcher-vmA-<zyx>) having [kubevirt.io/vm](http://kubevirt.io/vm) = vmA (same value). Thus it will know it's a migration."
> 
> 
> 
> That makes sense if we are using the value of that label to identify the old/new. Can you update the documents to explain that? Maybe show an example?

We need to you use both things, `kubevirt.io/vm` to search for realted virt-launcher pod and `CreationTimestamp` to sort them out and discover the target virt-launcher pod.

- Guest Cluster Network isolation. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to other guest clusters directly except through public LBs. Guest clusters shouldn’t be able to talk to any infra components except through public LBs.
- No TCP connection breakage over E/W and N/S during live migration with minimal disruption.
  - Disruption for pre-copy live migration ~1sec
  - Disruption for post-copy live migration (this happend if libvirt activate the target domain before live migration finish) ~8sec
- Expose hosted cluster pods running at workers (VMs) using NodePort/LoadBalancer services at infra cluster.
- Allow workers services access to services like kubedns and apiserver from hosted control plane.

To accomplish the goals listed above the ovn-kubernetes default network has to implement some features triggered for an Hypershift KubeVirt VM.

## Motivation

Hypershift and kubevirt integration requires the ability to have live-migration functionality across the network with OVN-Kubernetes implemented at the pod's default network.

### User Stories

I, a Hypershift user, need to migrate one hosted cluster without affecting different ones and have minimal
disruption.

### Goals

> Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kuberentes 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hypershift kubevirt provider needs the live-migration functionality, missing features at CNI need to be implement at the ovn-kubernetes 
```

> which is the default CNI for openshift, this should work with dual stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is the default CNI for openshift. This should work with dual stack.
```

- bridge binding: The virt-launcher interface is replaced by a bridge with one leg on the pod interface and the other at the VM tap device. When IPAM is configured on the pod interface, a DHCP server is started to advertise the pod's IP to DHCP aware VMs.

Since Masquerade binding has a fake address at VM guest it cannot be used for hypershift, the kubernetes nodes should see the address they are using to register to the api server.

The bridge binding is able to expose the pod IP to the VM as expected by hypershift but kubevirt does not support live migration with it, for kubevirt to support live migration with bridge binding 
at primary interface the OVN kubernetes CNI and controllers need to do the following:
- Do IP assignemnt with ovn-k but skip the CNI part that configure it at pod's netns veth.
- Do not expect the IP to be on the pod netns.
- Add the ability at ovn-k controllers to migrate pod's IP from node to node.

### Workflow Description

The gist of the design is:

1. Hypershift kubevirt workers attach to ovn-k node switches but CNI does not set IP addresses in virt-launcher pods netns

> 2. Deliver IP address at VMs configuring logical switch port DHCP options, the kubevirt DHCP server is deactivated.

Reviewer 2: Could you elaborate a bit here ? Why do we need to deactivate KubeVirt's DHCP server ?...

AFAIU, it basically advertises the IP / MAC / MTU / routes of the pod's default network interface.

Author: We don't explicit deactivate it, the fact that we don't configure an IP at virt launcher pod's veth means that the kubevirt DHCP server do not advertise anything.

3. A point to point routing is used so one node's subnet IP can be routed from different node
3. The VM's gateway IP and MAC are independent of the node they are running on using proxy arp
4. OVN missing ARP proxy features, configure MAC and IPv6, will be part of future 23.06 release, this is the [commit](https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn/commit/77846b215f317695384bd4bd27a647f6607413b1)

### API Extensions

n/a

## Design Details

### OVN-Kubernetes 

#### Topology

**Point to point routing:**

When the VM is running at a node that do not "own" it's IP address, like what happend
after a live migration, do point to point routing with a policy for outbound traffic and a static route for
inbound. By doing this, the VM can live migrate to different node and keep previous 
addresses (IP / MAC), thus preserving n/s and e/w communication, and ensuring traffic
goes over the node where the VM is running. The latter reduces inter node communication.

> If the VM is going back to the node that "owns" the ip those static routes and 
> policies should not be configured.

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
If the VM is going back to the node that "owns" the ip, those static routes and 
policies should be reconciled (deleted).
```

└───────────────────────────┘   └────────────────────────────┘ 
```
**Nodes logical switch ports:**

The "router" logical switch port per node need to activate "arp_proxy" option
with a fixed MAC and VMs gateway so VM neighbor cache is consistent 
after live migration also VM's subnet need to be added so VM can ping IP's 
from same subnet after live migration.

```text
    ┌────────────────────┐   ┌────────────────────┐
    │logical switch node1│   │logical switch node2│
    └────────────────────┘   └────────────────────┘
┌────────────────────┐  │     │   ┌─────────────────────┐      
│ lsp stor-node1     │──┘     └───│ lsp stor-node2      │      
│ options:           │            │ options:            │    
│  arp_proxy:        │            │   arp_proxy:        │
│   0a:58:0a:f3:00:00│            │    0a:58:0a:f3:00:00│
│   169.254.1.1      │            │    169.254.1.1      │
│   10.244.0.0/24    │            │    10.244.0.0/24    │
└────────────────────┘            └─────────────────────┘
```

**VMs logical switch ports:**

The logical switch port for new VMs will use ovn-k ipam to reserve an IP address,
and when live-migrating the VM, the LSP address will be re-used.

> CNI must avoid setting the IP address on the migration destination pod but ovn-k controllers should 
> continue book keeping it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CNI must avoid setting the IP address on the migration destination pod, but ovn-k controllers should 
preserve the IP allocation.
```

or something similar. The message is OK, but I find the wording a bit confusing. After all, you just want to say OVN-K must preserve the IP allocation, right ? Why not just say that ?
